## An	Illustrated	History	of	Black	Hole	Imaging	: Personal	Recollections	(1972-2002)

Jean-Pierre	Luminet

Aix-Marseille	Université,	CNRS,	Laboratoire	d'Astrophysique	de	Marseille	(LAM)	UMR	7326 &amp;	Centre	de	Physique	Théorique	de	Marseille	(CPT)	UMR	7332 &amp;	Observatoire	de	Paris	(LUTH)	UMR	8102 France E-mail: jean-pierre.luminet@lam.fr

Keywords

:	black	hole,	simulation,	observation,	general	relativity

## Abstract

The	Event	Horizon	Telescope	Consortium	is	on	the	verge	to	provide	the	first	telescopic image	 of	 massive	 black	 holes	 SgrA*	 and	 M87*	 surrounded	 by	 accretion	 disks,	 at	 a resolution	 scale	 comparable	 to	 the	 size	 of	 their	 event	 horizons.	 Well	 before	 this remarkable	 achievement	 made	 possible	 by	 VLBI	 radio	 astronomy,	 many	 researchers used	the	computer	to	reconstruct	how	a	black	hole	surrounded	by	luminous	material would	 look	 from	 close-up	 views.	 The	 images	 must	 experience	 extraordinary	 optical deformations	due	to	the	deflection	of	light	rays	produced	by	the	strong	curvature	of	the space-time	in	the	vicinity.	General	relativity	allows	the	calculation	of	such	effects,	both on	 a	 surrounding	 accretion	 disk	 and	 on	 the	 background	 star	 field.	 This	 article	 is	 an exhaustive	 and	 illustrated	 review	 of	 the	 numerical	 work	 on	 black	 hole	 imaging	 done during	the	first	thirty	years	of	its	history.

## Introduction

Black	holes	are	to	many	the	most	fascinating	objects	in	space.	According	to	the	laws	of general	relativity	they	are	by	themselves	invisible.	Contrarily	to	non-collapsed	celestial bodies,	their	surface	is	neither	solid	nor	gaseous	;	it	is	an	immaterial	border,	the	event horizon,	beyond	which	gravity	is	so	strong	that	nothing	can	escape,	not	even	light.

Seen	in	projection	on	a	sky	background,	the	event	horizon	would	have	the	aspect	of	a perfectly	 circular	 black	 disk	 if	 the	 black	 hole	 is	 static	 (Schwarzschild	 solution)	 or	 a slightly	 distorted	 one	 if	 it	 is	 in	 rotation	 (Kerr	 solution).	 Due	 to	 strong	 gravitational lensing,		bare	black	holes	could	leave	observable	imprints	on	a	starry	background	field in	the	vicinity	of	their	event	horizon,	but	due	to	their	relatively	small	sizes	and	their	very large	 distances	 from	 Earth,	 such	 imprints	 are	 completely	 out-of-reach	 of	 present-day telescopes.	Now,	in	typical	astrophysical	conditions,	a	realistic	black	hole,	whatever	its size	and	mass	(ranging	from	stellar	to	galactic	scales),	is	rarely	bare	but	is	dressed	in gaseous	material.	Pulled	in	a	spiral	 motion,	 the	 gas	 forms	 a	 hot	 accretion	 disk	 within which	it	emits	a	characteristic	spectrum	of	electromagnetic	radiation	(Pringle	and	Rees

1972).	Giant	black	holes,	such	as	those	currently	lurking	at	the	centers	of	galaxies,	can also	be	surrounded	by	a	stellar	cluster	whose	orbital	dynamics	is	strongly	influenced, whereas	stars	 penetrating	 into	 the	 tidal	 radius	 are	 disrupted	 (Hills	 1975	;	 Carter	 and Luminet	1982).	In	short,	if	a	black	hole	remains	by	itself	invisible,	it	«	switches	»	on	in	a characteristic	 way	 the	 matter	 it	 attracts	 and	 distorts	 the	 background	 starry	 field	 by gravitational	lensing. Tantalizing progress has been	 done	 to indirectly detect black holes	 through electromagnetic	 radiation	 from	 infalling	 matter	 (Pounds	 et	 al.	 2018)	 or	 gravitational waves	 (Abbott	 et	 al.	 2016).	 The	 Event	 Horizon	 Telescope	 (Doeleman	 2008)	 is	 an international	project	whose	goal	is	to	take	telescopic	images	at	millimeter	wavelengths of	the	nearest	massive	black	hole	lurking	at	the	center	of	our	Milky	Way	galaxy,	SgrA* (4.4	million	solar	masses)	and	of	the	supermassive	one	(6	billion	solar	masses)	in	the core	of	the	giant	elliptical	galaxy	M87.	The	first	images	at	the	resolution	scale	of	their apparent	event	horizons	are	expected	for	soon	(Doeleman	2017,	Goddi	et	al.	2017). Well	 before	 such	 an	 astronomical	 achievement	 and	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 basics	 of	 black holes	 astrophysics	 were	 developed	 in	 the	 1970's,	 physicists	 logically	 wondered	 what could	 look	 like	 a	 black	 hole	 surrounded	 by	 luminous	 material	 -	 stars	 or	 gas.	 Many educational	or	artistic	representations	can	be	seen	in	popular	science	magazines	and	on the	web,	in	the	form	of	a	black	sphere	floating	in	the	middle	of	a	circular	whirlwind	of brilliant	 gas.	 So	 striking	 they	 are,	 these	 images	 fail	 to	 report	 the	 astrophysical	 reality. This	 one	 can	 be	 correctly	 described	 by	 means	 of	 numerical	 simulations,	 taking	 into account	the	complex	distortions	that	the	strong	gravitational	field	prints	in	space-time and	light	rays	trajectories.	The	first	calculations	started	more	than	40	years	ago.	Existing reviews	 on	 the	 story	 of	 black	 hole	 imaging	 (James	 et	 al.	 2015,	 Falcke	 2017,	 Riazuelo 2018,	Davelaar	et	al.		2018,	Shaikh	2018)	give	only	references	to	a	few	landmarks.	The purpose	of	the	present	article	is	to	provide	an	exhaustive	and	illustrated	survey	of	the work	done	during	the	first	thirty	years	of	black	hole	imaging	history.	As	I	took	an	active part	 into	 it	 I'll	 also	 give	 some	 personal	 recollections	 and	 present	 unpublished	 visual material.

## Preliminary	steps

Black	 hole	 imaging	 started	 in	 1972	 at	 a	 Summer	 school	 in	 Les	 Houches	 (France). James	Bardeen,	building	on	earlier	analytical	work	of	Brandon	Carter,	initiated	research on	 gravitational	 lensing	 by	 spinning	 black	 holes	 (Bardeen	 1973).	 He	 gave	 a	 thorough analysis	 of	 light-ray	 propagation	 around	 a	 Kerr	 black	 hole.	 The	 Kerr	 solution for	 a rotating	 black	 hole had	been	discovered	ten	years	before	(Kerr	1963) and	since	then focused	the	attention	of	many	searchers	in	general	relativity,	because	it	represented	the most	general	state	of	equilibrium	of	an	astrophysical	black	hole	(Carter	1971). The	Kerr	space-time's	metric	depends	on	two	parameters	:	the	black	hole	mass M and its	 normalized	 angular	 momentum a .	 An	 important	 difference	 with	 usual	 stars,	 which are	in	differential	rotation,	is	that	Kerr	black	holes	are	rotating	with	perfect	rigidity	:	all

the	points	on	their	event	horizon	move	with	the	same	angular	velocity.	There	is	however

2

a	 critical	 angular	 momentum a	 =	 M (in	 units	 where	 G=c=1)	 above	 which	 the	 event horizon	would	«	break	up	»	:	this	limit	corresponds	to	the	horizon	having	a	spin	velocity equal	to	the	speed	of	light.	For	such	a	black	hole,	called	«	extreme	»,	the	gravitational field	 at	 the	 event	 horizon	 would	 cancel,	 because	 the	 inward	 pull	 of	 gravity	 would	 be compensated	by	the	huge	repulsive	centrifugal	forces.

Bardeen	computed	how	the	black	hole's	rotation	affects	the	shape	of	the	shadow	that the	event	horizon	casts	on	light	from	a	background	star	field.	For	a	black	hole	spinning close	to	the	maximum	angular	momentum,	the	result	is	a	D-shaped	shadow.

Figure	1. Apparent	shape	of	an	extreme	Kerr	black	hole	as	seen	by	a	distant	observer	in	the equatorial	plane,	if	the	black	hole	is	in	front	of	a	source	of	illumination	with	an	angular	size larger	than	that	of	the	black	hole.	The	shadow	bulges	out	on	the	side	of	the	hole	moving	away from	the	observer	and	squeezes	inward	and	flattens	on	the	side	moving	toward	the	observer (from	Bardeen	1972).

<!-- image -->

At	 the	 time,	 Chris	 Cunningham	 was	 preparing	 a	 PhD	 thesis	 at	 the	 University	 of Washington	 in	 Seattle	 under	 the	 supervision	 of	 Bardeen.	 He	 began	 to	 calculate	 the optical	appearance	of	a	star	in	circular	orbit	in	the	equatorial	plane	of	an	extreme	Kerr black	hole,	taking	account	of	the	Doppler	effect	due	to	relativistic	motion	of	the	star,	and pointed	out	the	corresponding	amplification	of	the	star's	luminosity.	He	gave	formulas but	did	not	produced	any	image	(Cunningham	&amp;	Bardeen	1972).

One	year	later	the	duo	published	a	more	complete	article	(Cunningham	&amp;	Bardeen 1973)	in	which,	for	the	first	time,	a	picture	was	shown	of	the	primary	and	secondary images	of	a	point	source	moving	in	a	circular	orbit	in	the	equatorial	plane	of	an	extreme Kerr	 black	 hole.	 They	 calculated	 as	 functions	 of	 time	 the	 apparent	 position	 and	 the energy	flux	of	the	images	seen	by	distant	observers.

Figure	2 .	Apparent	positions	of	the	two	brightest	images	of	a	point	like	star	in	circular	orbit	as functions	of	time,	for	 two	 orbital	 radii	 and	 an	 observer	 at	 a	 polar	 angle	 84°.024.	 The	 small, dashed	circle	in	each	plot	gives	the	scale	of	the	plot	in	units	of	GM/c 2 .	The	direct	image	moves along	the	solid	line,	the	secondary	image	along	the	dashed	line.	Ticks	mark	the	positions	of	the images	at	10	equally	spaced	times	(from	Cunningham	&amp;	Bardeen	1973).

<!-- image -->

In	 the	 upper	 diagram	 showing	 the	 distorted	 image	 of	 a	 circle	 of	 radius	 20M,	 we clearly	see	that,	whatever	the	observer's	inclination	angle,	the	black	hole	cannot	mask any	part	of	the	circle	behind.	We	also	see	that	the	black	hole's	spin	hardly	affects	the symmetry	of	the	primary	image	(although	the	asymmetry	is	stronger	for	the	secondary image).

In	1975,	Cunningham	completed	his	PhD	thesis	by	calculating	the	effects	of	redshifts and	focusing	on	the	spectrum	of	a	thin	accretion	disk	around	a	Kerr	black	hole.	He	gave formulas	and	drew	graphics	but	no	image	(Cunningham	1975).

The	first	visualization	of	the	gravitational	lensing	produced	by	a	non-spinning	black hole	on	a	background	star	field	was	carried	out	in	1978	by	Leigh	Palmer,	Maurice	Pryce and	William	Unruh,	using	an	Edwards	and	Sutherland	Vector	graphics	display	at	Simon Fraser	University	(Palmer	et	al.	1978).	They	showed	a	film	clip	in	a	number	of	lectures	in that	period	(including	the	9th	Texas	Symposium	on	Relativistic	Astrophysics),	but	they did	not	publish	their	simulation,	so	that	I	can't	reproduce	any	of	their	images.

## First	imaging	of	a	black	hole	accretion	disk

The	same	year	1978	but	quite	independently,	as	a	young	researcher	at	Paris-Meudon Observatory	 specialized	 in	 the	 mathematics	 of	 general	 relativity	 and	 following	 a suggestion	from	my	former	PhD	advisor	Brandon	Carter,	I	wondered	what	could	be	the aspect	of	a	Schwarzschild	black	hole	surrounded	by	a	luminous	accretion	disk.

Accretion	 disks	 are	 expected	 to	 form	 in	 some	 double-star	 systems	 that	 emit	 X-ray radiation	(with	black	holes	of	a	few	solar	masses)	and	in	the	centers	of	many	galaxies (with	black	holes	whose	mass	adds	up	to	between	one	million	and	several	billion	solar masses).	 Their	 close-up	 images	 must	 experience	 extraordinary	 optical	 deformations, due	to	the	deflection	of	light	rays	produced	by	the	strong	curvature	of	the	space-time	in the	vicinity	of	the	black	hole.	General	relativity	and	a	computer	allow	to	calculate	such an	effect.

Then I undertook to compute	 the bolometric appearance (i.e. including the contributions	at	all	electromagnetic	wavelengths)	of	a	thin	accretion	disk	gravitationally lensed	by	a	non-spinning	black	hole,	as	seen	from	far	away,	but	close	enough	to	resolve the	image.	I	considered	a	Schwarzschild	black	hole	and	a	physical	model	of	a	thin	disk	of gas	viewed	from	the	side,	either	by	a	distant	observer	or	a	photographic	plate.

Throughout	 my	 researchers'	 career	 I	 always	 considered	 that,	 before	 writing	 a computer	 program	 with	 full	 equations	 and	 running	 the	 machine,	 pure	 geometrical reasoning	 is	 of	 a	 great	 help	 to	 get	 a	 preliminary	 idea	 of	 the	 result.	 Otherwise,	 what guarantee	have	you	that	your	program	had	no	mistake	?

I	 did	 this	 kind	 of	 geometrical	 reasoning	 to	 guess	 what	 I	 should	 obtain	 for	 a	 black hole's	accretion	disk	appearance.	In	an	ordinary	situation,	meaning	in	Euclidean	space, the	curvature	is	weak.	This	is	the	case	for	the	solar	system	when	one	observes	the	planet Saturn	surrounded	by	its	magnificent	rings,	with	a	viewpoint	situated	slightly	above	the plane.	 Of	 course,	 some	 part	 of	 the	 rings	 is	 hidden	 behind	 the	 planet,	 but	 one	 can mentally	reconstruct	their	elliptic	outlines	quite	easily.	Around	a	black	hole,	everything behaves	differently	because	of	the	optical	deformations	due	to	the	space-time	curvature, as	 depicted	in	the	diagram	below	-	published	only	years	later	in	my	popular	book	on black	holes	(Luminet	1992).

Figure	 3. Optical	 distortions	 near	 a	 black	 hole.	 We	 imagine	 a	 black	 hole	 surrounded	 by	 a bright	disk.	The	system	is	observed	from	a	great	distance	at	an	angle	of	10°	with	respect	to	the plane	of	the	disk.	The	light	rays	are	received	by	a	photographic	plate.	Because	of	the	curvature of	space-time	in	the	neighborhood	of	the	black	hole,	the	image	of	the	system	is	very	different from	the	ellipses	which	would	be	observed	if	an	ordinary	star	or	a	planet	replaced	the	black hole.	The	light	emitted	from	the	upper	side	of	the	disk	forms	a	direct	image	and	is	considerably distorted	 so	 that	 it	 is	 completely	 visible.	 The	 lower	 side	 of	 the	 disk	 is	 also	 visible	 as		 a secondary		image	caused	by	highly	curved	light	rays	(from	Luminet	1992).

<!-- image -->

Strikingly,	we	can	see	the	top	of	the	disk	in	its	totality,	whatever	the	angle	from	which we	view	it	may	be.	The	back	part	of	the	disk	is	not	hidden	by	the	black	hole,	since	the images	that	come	from	it	are	to	some	extent	enhanced	by	the	curvature,	and	reach	the distant	 observer.	 Much	 more	 astonishing,	 one	 also	 sees	 a	 part	 of	 the	 bottom	 of	 the gaseous	disk.	In	fact,	the	light	rays	which	normally	propagate	downwards,	in	a	direction opposite	to	that	of	the	observer,	climb	back	to	the	top	and	give	a	«	secondary	image	»,	a highly	deformed	picture	of	the	bottom	of	the	disk.	We	also	check	that	no	radiation	can come	from	the	region	between	the	black	hole's	event	horizon	and	the	inner	edge	of	the disk,	because	the	properties	of	the	Schwarzschild	space-time	forbid	the	accretion	disk from	touching	the	surface	of	the	black	hole.	The	circular	orbits	of	the	gas	in	the	disk	can be	maintained	only	down	to	a	critical	distance	of	three	times	the	Schwarzschild	radius ( i.e. 6M).	Below	this	the	disk	is	unstable;	the	gas	particles	plunge	directly	towards	the black	hole	without	having	enough	time	to	emit	electromagnetic	radiation.

Then	I	could	start	to	calculate	the	things	numerically.	I	used	the	IBM	7040	mainframe of	Paris-Meudon	Observatory,	an	early	transistor	computer	with	punch	card	inputs.	The machine	generated	isolines	that	were	directly	translatable	as	smooth	curves	using	the drawing	software	available	at	the	time.	The	first	step	was	to	integrate	the	equations	of light	ray	trajectories	in	Schwarzschild	space-time	and	draw	the	isoradial	curves	( i.e .	 at constant	radial	distance	from	the	black	hole)	of	a	thin	disk	around	the	black	hole,	as	they would	be	seen	by	an	observer	above	the	disk's	plane	(Figure	4).

Figure	4. Isoradial	curves	representing	rays	emitted	at	constant	radius	from	the	hole,	as	seen by	an	observer	at	30°	(Left)	and	10°	(Right)	above	the	disk's	plane.	Full	lines	:	direct	images; dashed	lines	:	secondary	images.

<!-- image -->

In	fact	the	gravitational	lensing	generates	an	infinity	of	images	of	the	disk,	because the	light	rays	can	travel	any	number	of	times	around	the	black	hole	before	escaping	from its	 gravitational	field	and	being	observed	by	a	distant	astronomer.	The	primary	image shows	the	upper	side,	the	secondary	image	shows	the	lower	side,	the	third	image	shows the	 upper	 side	 again,	 and	 so	 on.	 However,	 higher	 order	 images	 are	 not	 optically interesting	 because	 they	 are	 stuck	 to	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 central	 black	 spot,	 the	 latter representing	 the	 «	shadow	»	 of	 the	 actual	 black	 hole,	 namely	 the	 apparent	 size	 of	 its event	horizon	expanded	by	a	factor	3√3/2	~	2.6.

By	comparison	with	the	image	calculated	by	Cunningham	and	Bardeen	for	a	circular ring	at	distance	20M	around	an	extreme	Kerr	black	hole	(Fig.	2),	we	check	that	the	spin of	the	black	hole	hardly	affects	the	shape	of	the	primary	image.

The	next	step	was	to	take	into	account	the	physical	properties	of	the	gaseous	disk	: rotation,	temperature	and	emissivity.	When	the	flow	of	matter	into	a	black	hole	is	not too	great,	it	forms	a	very	thin	accretion	disk.	In	that	case,	the	proper	luminosity	of	the disk	can	be	accurately	calculated,	according	to	models	first	described	in	1973	(Shakura &amp;	 Sunyaev	 1973)	 and	 1974	 in	 their	 relativistic	 version	 (Page	 and	 Thorne	 1974):	 the intensity	 of	 radiation	 emitted	 at	 any	 given	 point	 of	 the	 disk	 only	 depends	 on	 its temperature,	 and	 the	 latter	 only	 depends	 on	 the	 radial	 distance	 to	 the	 black	 hole. Therefore	 the	 intrinsic	 brightness	 of	 the	 disk	 cannot	 be	 uniform.	 The	 maximum luminosity	comes	from	the	inner	regions	close	to	the	event	horizon,	because	it	is	there

that	the	gas	is	the	hottest. In	addition,	the	apparent	luminosity	of	the	disk	is	still	very	different	from	its	intrinsic one:	the	radiation	picked	up	at	a	great	distance	is	frequency-	and	intensity-shifted	with respect	 to	 the	 emitted	 one.	 There	 are	 two	 sorts	 of	 shift	 effects.	 There	 is	 the	 Einstein effect,	in	which	the	gravitational	field	lowers	the	frequency	and	decreases	the	intensity, and	there	is	the	Doppler	effect,	where	the	displacement	of	the	source	with	respect	to	the observer	causes	amplification	as	the	source	approaches	and	attenuation	as	the	source retreats.	The	combination	of	the	two	effects	is	not	trivial.		I	calculated	it	at	each	point	of the	photographic	plate.	In	our	case	the	Doppler	effect	dominates,	and	it	is	caused	by	the disk	 rotating	 around	 the	 black	 hole.	 The	 regions	 of	 the	 disk	 closest	 to	 the	 black	 hole rotate	at	a	velocity	approaching	that	of	light,	so	that	the	Doppler	shift	is	considerable and	 drastically	 modifies	 the	 image	 as	 seen	 by	 a	 distant	 observer.	 The	 sense	 of	 the rotation	of	the	disk	is	such	that	matter	recedes	from	the	observer	on	the	right-hand	side of	 the	 photograph	 and	 approaches	 on	 the	 left-hand	 side.	 As	 the	 matter	 recedes,	 the Doppler	 deceleration	 is	 added	 to	 the	 gravitational	 deceleration,	 explaining	 the	 very strong	 attenuation	 on	 the	 right-hand	 side.	 In	 contrast,	 on	 the	 left-hand	 side	 the	 two effects	 tend	 to	 cancel	 each	 other	 out,	 so	 the	 image	 more	 or	 less	 retains	 its	 intrinsic intensity.	 Figures	 6-7	 depict	 the	 isophotes	 -		 i.e.	 the		 curves	 of	 constant	 apparent luminosity	-	as	seen	by	an	observer	at	respectively	30°	and	10°	above	the	disk's	plane. The	 final	 black	 and	 white	 "photographic"	 image	 was	 obtained	 from	 this	 pattern. Lacking	of	an	appropriate	drawing	software,	I	had	to	create	it	by	hand.	Using	numerical data	 from	 the	 computer,	 I	 drew	 directly	 on	 negative	 paper	 with	 pen	 and	 Indian	 ink, placing	dots	more	densely	where	the	simulation	showed	more	light	(a	few	thousands dots	for	the	full	plate).	Next,	I	took	the	negative	of	my	negative	to	get	the	positive,	the black	 points	 becoming	 white	 and	 the	 white	 background	 becoming	 black.	 The	 result converged	into	the	pleasantly	organic,	asymmetrical	form	reproduced	in	Figure	8,	both

visually	engaging	and	scientifically	revealing.

7

<!-- image -->

Figure	5. Curves	of	constant	spectral	shift,	as	seen	by	an	observer	at	10°	above	the	plane	of the	 disk.	 Positive	 values	 of	 the	 spectral	 shift	 contours	 correspond	 to		 redshifts,	 negative values	to		blueshifts	(from	Luminet	1979).

Figure	 6. Curves	 of	 constant	 apparent	 flux	 in	 units	 of	 the	 maximum	 intrinsic	 flux,	 as seen	by	an	observer	at	30°	above	the	disk's	plane.	Dashed	line	:	the	apparent	inner	edge of	the	disk	at	r=6M,	where	flux	is	zero		(from	Luminet	1979).

<!-- image -->

Figure	7. Curves	of	constant	apparent	flux	in	units	of	the	maximum	intrinsic	flux,	as	seen by	an	observer	at	10°	above	the	disk's	plane.	The	luminosity	is	maximum	in	the	regions where	high	intrinsic	luminosity	combines	with	high	blueshift		(from	Luminet	1979).

<!-- image -->

Figure	8. Image	of	a	Spherical	Black	Hole	with	Thin	Accretion	Disk.	As	expected,	the	main characteristic	of	the	image	is	the	strong	asymmetry	of	the	disk's	brightness,	so	that	one	side is	far	brighter	and	the	other	is	far	dimmer.	Another	one	is	that,	although	the	upper	side	of	the disk	is	completely	visible,	only	a	small	part	of	the	lower	side	is	observable.	This	is	due	to	the fact	that	in	a	realistic	situation,	the	gaseous	disk	is	opaque;	therefore	it	absorbs	the	light	rays that	 it	 intercepts.	 It	 follows	 that	 a	 major	 part	 of	 the	 secondary	 image	 is	 occulted	 by	 the primary	image,	its	visible	part	being	stuck	around	the	edge	of	the	black	hole,	like	a	gleaming halo	(from	Luminet	1979).

<!-- image -->

To	comment	in	a	non-scientific	manner	this	first	theoretical	glimpse	of	the	shadow	of a	black	hole,	no	caption	could	fit	better	than	these	verses	by	the	French	poet	Gérard	de Nerval,	written	as	soon	as	in	1854	(Nerval	1854) :

In	seeking	the	eye	of	God,	I	saw	nought	but	an	orbit Vast,	black,	and	bottomless,	from	which	the	night	which	there	lives Shines	on	the	world	and	continually	thickens

A	strange	rainbow	surrounds	this	somber	well, Threshold	of	the	ancient	chaos	whose	offspring	is	shadow, A	spiral	engulfing	Worlds	and	Days	!

The	picture	was	first	published	in	November	1978	a	popular	article	on	black	holes	for a	 French	 magazine	 (Carter	 &amp;	 Luminet	 1978),	 and	 the complete	 work	 with	 technical details	 a	 few	 months	 later	 in	 a	 peered-reviewed	 European	 journal	 (Luminet	 1979).	 A funny	anecdote	is	that	many	readers	who	saw	for	the	first	time	this	simulated	picture	of a	 perfectly non-luminous star	 believed	 that	 the	 author	 used	 the	 name Luminet as	 a pseudonym.	Indeed	I	enjoyed	the	pun	!

## An	anticipated	image	of	Sagittarius	A*	?

The	1978	calculation	was	independent	of	the	mass	of	the	black	hole	and	of	the	flow of	gas	swallowed,	on	the	condition	that	the	latter	remains	moderate.	In	other	situations, found	for	instance	in	binary	X-ray	sources	harboring	stellar	mass	black	holes	or	in	active galactic	 nuclei	 with	 supermassive	 black	 holes	 accreting	 near	 or	 above	 the	 Eddington limit,	the	structure	of	the	accretion	disk	may	be	thick,	take	the	form	of	a	torus	and	so	on (Abramowicz	et	al.	1978).	The	picture	of	figure	8	could	therefore	correctly	describe	only relatively	weak	sources,	like	giant	black	holes	lying	at	the	center	of	non-	active	galaxies and	sucking	in	the	interstellar	gas	at	a	mild	rate.

At	 the	 time	 of	 the	 calculation,	 it	 had	 just	 been	 suggested	 that	 the	 giant	 elliptical galaxy	M87	could	harbor	such	a	giant	black	hole	with	a	few	billion	solar	masses	(Sargent et	al.	1978)	and	that	the	newly	discovered	compact	radiosource	Sagittarius	A*	(SgrA*)	at the	center	of	our	own	galaxy,	the	Milky	Way,	could	be	connected	to	a	massive	black	hole of	a	few	million	solar	masses	(Balick	&amp;	brown	1974).	The	observational	support	was	still very	 weak,	 but	 since	 then	 we	 have	 convincing	 indications	 that	 most	 of	 non-active galactic	 nuclei	 harbor	 «	dormant	»	 massive	 black	 holes	 (Kormendy	 &amp;	 Ho	 2001) surrounded	by	thin	gaseous	disks	accreting	at	a	low	rate.	For	instance,	the	best	estimate of	the	accretion	rate	onto	SgrA*	is	provided	by	radio	polarization	measurements	and	is constrained	 to	 vary	 in	 the	 range	 10 -9 MS/yr	 -	 10 -7 MS/yr	 on	 scales	 of	 hundreds	 to thousands	Schwarzschild	radii	(Marrone	et	al.	2007). Thus	SgrA*	is	an	ideal	target	to check	 the	 accuracy	 of	 Figure	 8,	 although	 I	 did	 not	 suspect	 this	 :	 the	 idea	 to	 image	 in practice	the	shadow	of	SgrA*	using	VLBI	would	not	be	presented	before	2000	(Falcke	et al.	2000).

Compared	to	the	rough	simulation	of	1979,	a	realistic	image	reconstruction	of	the galactic	black	hole	SgrA*	involves	a	number	of	additional	restrictions.	For	instance,	as already	mentioned,	my	computerized	black	hole	picture	included	the	contributions	of	all electromagnetic	 wavelengths,	 whereas	 any	 observational	 device	 works	 only	 in	 a restricted	 range	 of	 frequencies.	 The	 theory	 of	 thin	 accretion	 disks	 tells	 us	 that	 the wavelengths	at	which	the	intrinsic	luminous	flux	is	maximal	depends	on	the	mass	of	the black	hole.	For	a	stellar	mass	black	hole	it	should	be	in	the	X-ray	band,	but	for	a	several millions	solar	masses	black	hole,	the	major	part	of	emission	would	be	in	the	millimeter radio	band.

Now	 go	 back	 to	 figure	 6	 showing	 curves	 of	 constant	 apparent	 flux	 seen	 by	 an observer	at	30°	above	the	disk's	plane.	Assume	that	the	black	hole	is	about	4	millions solar	 masses,	 as	 suggested	 from	 recent	 measurements	 of	 SgrA*	 (Chatzopoulos	 et	 al. 2015)	 and	 assume	 that	 we	 have	 a	 VLBI	 network	 of	 radiotelescopes	 at	 the	 limit	 of sensitivity	to	detect	such	a	radiation.	Due	to	the	various	shift	effects	described	above, only	 the	 part	 of	 the	 image	 with	 an	 apparent	 flux	 greater	 than	 1.0	 (in	 units	 of	 the maximum	intrinsic	flux)	will	be	detectable.	The	remaining	image	would	be	the	bright crescent	 shown	 in	 Figure	 9.	 It	 is	 interesting	 to	 point	 out	 the	 similitude	 of	 this	 rough result	with	some	recent	image	reconstructions	of	Sgr	A*	performed	in	the	framework	of the	 Event	 Horizon	 Telescope	 program,	 through	 state-of-art	 multi-dimensional	 general relativistic	magneto-hydrodynamic	simulations	(Johnson	et	al.	2017).

Figure	9. Left	:	Remaining	image	of	Figure	6	when	the	regions	with	an	apparent	flux	lower than	 1.0	 have	 ben	 masked.	 Right	:	 Image	 reconstruction	 of	 SgrA*	 Synthetic	 that	 could	 be recovered	 with	 an	 array	 of	 8	 radiotelescopes	 and	 averaging	 8	 epochs,	 using	 general relativistic	magneto-hydrodynamic	simulations,	for	a	similar	angle	of	view	(from	Johnson	et al.	2017).

<!-- image -->

## Colors	bloomed	first	in	Japan

Go	back	to	the	thread	of	history.	Black	hole	imaging	remained	a	backwater	of	physics research	until	a	decade	later.	In	1987,	two	educational	papers	on	gravitational	lensing by	black	holes	appeared	in	a	journal	for	physics	teachers	and	students.	Schastok	et	al (1987)	 discussed	 the	 effects	 of	 light	 deflection	 on	 the	 stellar	 sky	 as	 seen	 from	 the vicinity	 of	 a	 rotating	 black	 hole	 and	 showed	 some	 light	 rays	 circling	 an	 extreme	 Kerr black	hole,	but	they	did	not	produce	a	realistic	picture.	Ohanian	(1987)	treated	the	case when	the	light	can	circle	around	a	Schwarzschild	black	hole	one	or	several	times,	giving rise	to	a	sequence	of	images.	Apparently	ignoring	my	1979	article,	he	provided	the	same formulas	for	the	deflection	angles	and	light	intensities	in	terms	of	elliptic	integrals,	and he	did	not	show	any	visualization.

In	 1988	 I	 travelled	 to	 Japan	 to	 attend	 an	 international	 conference	 in	 Tokyo.		 Two young	 Japanese	 searchers	 came	 to	 me	 and,	 to	 my	 surprise,	 they	 wanted	 to	 take	 a photograph	 of	 all	 three	 together.	 Indeed,	 Jun	 Fukue	 and	 Takushi	 Yokoyama	 had	 just extended	my	work	by	adding	(false)	colors	to	the	black	hole	picture	(Fukue	&amp;	Yokohama 1988).		 This	 was	 a	 real	 improvement,	 since	 my	 monochromatic	 (because	 bolometric) image	 did	 not	 take	 into	 account	 the	 real	 changes	 of	 apparent	 wavelengths	 in	 the accretion	disk,	shifted	from	blue	on	one	side	to	red	on	the	other,	and	so	on.	Here	are some	of	the	pictures	they	produced.	The	Japanese	boys	told	me	that	in	their	manuscript, they	initially	used	the	term	'Lady'	for	the	accretion	disk,	but	the	editors	replaced	this	by the	 'accretion	 disk',	 in	 accordance	 with	 the	 general	 style	 of	 the Publications	 of	 the Astronomical	 Society	 of	 Japan .	 It	 was	 well	 before	 the	 feminization	 of	 language	 that prevails	today	in	every	branch	of	human	activity,	including	astrophysics!

Figure	 10. Four	 types	 of	 photographs	 of	 a	 disk	 with	 Tmax	 =	 10 7	 K	 rotating	 a	 stellar-mass Schwarzschild	 black	 hole.	 The	 photographer's	 distance	 from	 the	 center	 is	 10 4 	 times	 the Schwarzschild	radius,	and	is	inclination	angle	is	20°.	(a)	The	distribution	of	the	temperature	in false	colors,	from	orange	(Tobs	&lt;	3.10 6 	K)	through	yellow	(4.10 6 	K	&lt;	Tobs	&lt;	5.10 6 	K)	and	white (6.10 6 	K	&lt;	Tobs	&lt;	7.10 6 	K)	to	violet	(Tobs	&gt;	10 7 	K).	(b)	The	bolometric	photograph.(c)	The	X-ray photograph	in	the	2-30-keV	band.	(d)	The	optical	photograph.

<!-- image -->

Figure	11. The	color	photograph	of	a	disk	located	at	the	center	of	active	galaxies

<!-- image -->

## First	Flight	into	a	Black	Hole

In	 1989-1990,	 while	 I	 spent	 one	 year	 as	 a	 research	 visitor	 at	 the	 University	 of California,	 Berkeley,	 my	 former	 collaborator	 at	 Paris-Meudon	 Observatory,	 Jean-Alain Marck,	 both	 an	 expert	 in	 general	 relativity	 and	 computer	 programming,	 started	 to extend	 my	 simulation	 of	 1979.	 The	 fast	 improvement	 of	 computers	 and	 visualization software	(he	used	a	DEC-VAX	8600	machine)	allowed	him	to	add	colors	and	motions.	To reduce	 the	 computing	 time,	 Marck	 developed	 a	 new	 method	 for	 calculating	 the geodesics	in	Schwarzschild	space-time,	published	only	several	years	later	(Marck	1996). In	a	first	step	(Marck	1989),	he	calculated	static	images	of	an	accretion	disk	around	a Schwarzschild	black	hole	according	to	various	angles	of	view,	see	Figure	12.

Figure	 12. Colored	 images	 of	 a	 black	 hole	 accretion	 disk	 for	 various	 angles	 of	 view	 by	 J.-A. Marck,	1989	(unpublished).

<!-- image -->

In	1991,	when	I	went	back	to	Paris	Observatory,	I	started	the	project	for	the	FrenchGerman	 TV	 channel	 Arte	 of	 a	 full-length,	 pedagogical	 movie	 about	 general	 relativity

(Delesalle	 et	 al.	 1994).	 As	 the	 final	 sequence	 dealt	 with	 black	 holes,	 I	 asked	 Marck	 to introduce	motion	of	the	observer	with	the	camera	moving	around	close	to	the	disk,	as well	as	to	include	higher-order	lensed	images	and	background	stellar	skies	in	order	to make	 the	 pictures	 as	 realistic	 as	 possible.	 The	 resulting	 animation	 for	 an	 observer moving	 along	 an	 elliptic	 trajectory	 around	 a	 Schwarzschild	 black	 hole	 and	 crossing several	times	the	plane	of	a	thin	accretion	disk	(Figure	13)	is	now	available	on	the	web (Marck	1991).	Compared	to	the	static,	black-and-white	simulation	of	1979,	the	snapshot reproduced	in	Figure	14	shows	spectacular	improvements.

Eventually, for the needs of a videocassette shown	 in various international conferences	 and	 workshops,	 Marck	 calculated	 a	 new	 series	 of	 images	 as	 seen	 by	 an observer	plunging	into	the	event	horizon	of	a	Schwarzschild	black	hole	along	a	parabolic trajectory	(Marck	1994).	A	few	snapshots	were	reproduced	later	in	a	special	issue	of	a French	popular	magazine	devoted	to	black	holes	(Marck	&amp;	Luminet	1997),	see	Figure 15.

The	 black	 hole	 visualizations	 obtained	 by	 Jean-Alain	 Marck	 not	 only	 were	 a	 very significant	improvement	of	all	previous	work,	but	they	would	remain	unsurpassed	for about	twenty	years,	both	scientifically	and	aesthetically.	As	a	striking	illustration,	Figure 16	compares	the	view	of	an	accretion	disk	calculated	by	Marck	for	an	observer	in	the equatorial	 plane	 of	 a	 Schwarzschild	 black	 hole,	 including	 all	 the	 shift	 effects,	 a	 truly physical	model	of	the	accretion	disk	and	effects	of	light	diffusion,	and	the	famous	view designed	 in	 2014	 for	 the	 science-fiction	 movie Interstellar, calculated	 with	 similar conditions	 (except	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 black	 hole	 was	 of	 the	 Kerr	 type,	 but	 as	 already pointed	out	the	rotation	does	not	affect	significantly	the	asymmetry	of	the	image).	The latter	 was	 obtained	 by	 a	 team	 of	 200	 graphic	 animation	 experts	 who	 used	 a	 general relativistic	programming	code	provided	by	their	scientific	advisor	Kip	Thorne	(James	et al.	2015,	Thorne	2014a).	At	the	time	it	was	presented	by	some	medias	as	a	«	simulation of	unprecedented	accuracy	»	(Rogers	2014).

As	I	already	commented	in	more	details	in	previous	papers	(Luminet	2015,	Luminet 2018), both	images	correctly	describe	the	primary	and	secondary	images	created	by	the gravitational	field,	but	the	second	one,	used	for Interstellar and	despite	the	advice	of	Kip Thorne	 (Thorne	 2014b),	 left	 out	 the	 shift	 effects	 and	 the	 physical	 structure	 of	 the accretion	disk	on	the	pretext	that	a	highly	asymmetric	image	of	the	disk	would	be	harder for	a	mass	audience	to	grasp.	However	it	is	precisely	this	strong	asymmetry	of	apparent luminosity	that	is	the	main	signature	of	the	black	hole,	the	only	celestial	object	able	to give	the	internal	regions	of	an	accretion	disk	a	speed	of	rotation	close	to	the	speed	of light	and	to	induce	a	very	strong	shift	effect.	In	short Interstellar's image	was	certainly impressive	 but	 was	 not	 really	 what	 a	 black	 hole	 would	 look	 like;	 Marcks'	 image	 was much	closer	from	astrophysical	 reality,	 in	 addition	 to	 be,	 in	 my	 opinion,	 aesthetically even	more	appealing.

Figure	13. Elliptic	trajectory	around	a	Schwarzschild	black	hole	followed	by	the	observer	in the	 movie	 by	 Delesalle	 et	 al.	 (1994).	 The	 trajectory	 undergoes	 a	 strong	 general	 relativistic precession	of	its	periastron,	and	the	observer	crosses	several	times	the	plane	of	the	accretion disk.

<!-- image -->

Figure	 14. Colored	image	of	a	black	hole	accretion	disk	as	seen	by	a	moving	observer	at	7° above	 the	 disk's	 plane.	 The	 observer	 uses	 a	 camera	 equipped	 with	 filters	 to	 convert	 into optical	 radiation	 the	 emitted	 electromagnetic	 radiation.	 The	 arbitrary	 coloring	 encodes	 the apparent	 luminosity	 of	 the	 disk,	 the	 brightest	 and	 warmest	 parts	 being	 colored	 yellow,	 the colder	parts	red.	The	transparency	of	the	disk	was	enhanced	in	order	to	show	the	secondary image	through	the	primary,	as	well	as	some	background	stars.	Compared	with	figure	8	there are	additional	distortions	and	asymmetries	due	to	the	Doppler	effect	induced	by	the	motion	of the	observer	himself.	As	a	result	the	region	of	maximum	luminosity	has	no	more	the	shape	of	a crescent	(from	Marck	1991)

<!-- image -->

Figure	15. This	series	of	snapshots	are	taken	by	a	traveller	at	positions	1	to	8	of	the	parabolic trajectory	plotted	in	the	top	part.	Initially	he	is	located	under	the	plane	of	the	disc,	at	a	distance 1200	M	from	the	center.	He	crosses	the	accretion	disk	at	39	M	(4)	and	is	very	close	to	the horizon	at	point	7.	Then	his	speed	approaches	that	of	light	and	the	image	distortions	become quite	considerable.	He	takes	his	last	shot	(8)	inside	the	black	hole	at	0.7	M	from	the	center, having	rotated	180	degrees	to	look	through	the	rear	window	and	see	one	last	time	several strongly	distorted	images	of	the	accretion	disk	and	the	background	stellar	sky	(from	Marck	&amp; Luminet	1997).

<!-- image -->

Figure	 16. Top	:	 Marck's	 simulation	 of	 a	 black	 hole	 accretion	 disk	 as	 seen	 in	 the	 equatorial plane,	1994.	Bottom	:	the	same	by	James	et	al.	for	the	movie Interstellar ,	2014.

<!-- image -->

## Generalizations	to	Kerr	Black	Holes

Unfortunately	 Marck's	 simulations	 of	 black	 hole	 accretion	 disks	 remained	 mostly ignored	from	the	professional	community,	due	to	the	fact	that	they	were	not	published in	peer-reviewed	journals	and,	after	their	author	prematurely	died	in	May	2000,	nobody could	find	the	trace	of	his	computer	program…

Then,	unaware	of	Marck's	results,	several	researchers	of	the	1990's	were	involved	in the	program	of	calculating	black	hole	gravitational	lensing	effects	in	various	situations. Stuckey	(1993)	studied	photon	trajectories	which	circle	a	static	black	hole	one	or	two times	 and	 terminate	 at	 their	 emission	 points	 («	boomerang	 photons	»),	 producing	 a sequence	of	ring-shaped	mirror	images.	Nemiroff	(1993)	described	the	visual	distortion effects	to	an	observer	traveling	around	and	descending	to	the	surface	of	a	neutron	star and	a	black	hole,	discussing	multiple	imaging,	red-	and	blue-shifting,	the	photon	sphere and	multiple	Einstein	rings.	He	displayed	computer-generated	illustrations	highlighting the	 distortion	 effects	 on	 a	 background	 stellar	 field	 but	 no	 accretion	 disk,	 and	 made	 a short	movie	now	available	on	the	internet	(Nemiroff	2018),	two	snapshots	of	which	are shown	in	figure	17.

Figure	17. Trip	to	a	black	hole	by	Robert	Nemiroff,	1993.

<!-- image -->

The	 first	 simulations	 of	 the	 shape	 of	 accretion	 disks	 around	 Kerr	 black	 holes	 were performed	 by	 Viergutz	 (1993).	 He	 treated	 slightly	 thick	 disks	 and	 produced	 colored contours,	including	the	disk's	secondary	image	which	wraps	under	the	black	hole	(figure 18).	 The	 result	 is	 a	 colored	 generalization	 of	 Figure	 2	 by	 Cunningham	 and	 Bardeen (1973).

Figure	 18. Primary	 and	 secondary	 images	 of	 a	 simple	 accretion	 disk	 model	 around	 a	 Kerr black	hole,	seen	by	a	faraway	observer.	Colors	indicate	combined	gravitational	and	Doppler shifts	(from	Viergutz	1993).

<!-- image -->

More	elaborate	views	of	a	geometrically	thin	and	optically	thick	accretion	disk	around a	Kerr	black	hole	were	obtained	by	Fanton	et	al.	(1997).	They	developed	a	new	program of	 ray	 tracing	 in	 Kerr	 metric,	 and	 added	 false	 colors	 to	 encode	 the	 degree	 of	 spectral shift	 and	 temperature	 maps	 (figure	 19).	 Zhang	 et	 al.	 (2002)	 used	 the	 same	 code	 to produce	 black-and-white	 images	 of	 standard	 thin	 accretion	 disks	 around	 black	 holes with	different	spins,	viewing	angles	and	energy	bands	(figure	20).

Bromley	 et	 al.	 (1997)	 calculated	 integrated	 line	 profiles	 from	 a	 geometrically	 thin disk	 about	 a	 Schwarzschild	 and	 an	 extreme	 Kerr	 black	 hole,	 in	 order	 to	 get	 an observational	signature	of	the	frame-dragging	effect	(Figure	21).

In	1998	Andrew	Hamilton	started	to	develop	for	a	student	project	at	the	University	of Colorado	 a	 'Black	 Hole	 Flight	 Simulator',	 with	 film	 clips	 that	 have	 been	 shown	 at planetariums,	also	available	on	the	Internet.	The	first	depictions	were	very	schematic, but the website was constantly implemented. It now offers journeys into a Schwarzschild	or	a	Reissner-Nordström	(i.e.	electrically	charged)	black	hole	with	effects of	gravitational	lensing	on	a	stellar	background	field,	as	well	as	animated	visualizations of	magneto-hydrodynamic	simulations	of	a	disk	and	jet	around	a	non-rotating	black	hole (Hamilton	2018).

Figure	19. False	color	contour	maps	showing	how	the	monochromatic	radiation	emitted	by	a Keplerian	accretion	disk	would	be	seen	at	infinity	for	various	values	of	the	inclination	angle	to the	 plane	 of	 the	 disk	 (top	 to	 bottom	:	 5°,	 45°,	 85°).	 The	 left	 column	 refers	 to	 a	 non-rotating black	hole,	the	right	one	to	a	rapidly	rotating	black	hole	with	a=0.998	M.	The	white	zones	stand for	the	regions	with	zero	redshift.	Left-hand	side	of	the	disk	is	approaching	the	observer	and blueshifted	(from	Fanton	et	al.	1997).

<!-- image -->

Figure	20. Disk	images	of	accretion	disks	extending	up	to	20	Schwarzschild	radii	for	different spins	of	Kerr	black	holes,	viewed	in	different	energy	ranges	and	inclination	angles	(from	Zhang et	al.	2002).

<!-- image -->

Figure	 21. Image	of	a	geometrically	thin	disk	around	an	extreme	Kerr	(maximally	rotating) black	hole	seen	at	an	inclination	of	75°.	The	inner	and	outer	radii	of	the	Keplerian	(circularly rotating)	disk	are	at	1.24	M	and	6	M.	The	colors	encode	the	apparent	light	frequency,	the	white strip	divides	redshifted	and	blueshifted	regions.	The	asymmetric	appearance	of	the	inner	disk edge	results	from	the	frame-dragging	effect	of	black	hole	rotation	(from	Bromley	et	al.	1997).

<!-- image -->

## From	Idea	to	Reality

A	 turning	 point	 in	 the	 history	 of	 black	 hole	 imaging	 came	 when	 the	 possibility	 of viewing	in	practice	the	shadow	of	SgrA*	with	VLBI	radio	astronomy	techniques	was	first discussed	(Falcke	et	al.	2000,	Doeleman	et	al.	2001).	Falcke	et	al.	(who	did	not	quote	my pioneering	article)	developed	a	general	relativistic	ray-tracing	code	that	allowed	them to	 simulate	 observed	 images	 of	 Sgr	 A*	 for	 various	 combinations	 of	 black	 hole	 spin, inclination	angle,	and	morphology	of	the	emission	region	directly	surrounding	the	black hole	(figure	22).

Bromley	et	al.	(2001)	provided	maps	of	the	polarized	emission	of	a	Keplerian	disk	to illustrate	how	the	images	of	polarized	intensity	from	the	vicinity	of	SgrA*	would	appear in	future	VLBI	observations	(Figure	23).

Indeed,	 in	 parallel	 with	 but	 rather	 independently	 from	 the	 theoretical	 simulations reviewed	here,	the	work	to	image	SgrA*	by	VLBI	experiments	had	begun	also	back	in	the 1970's,	after	the	discovery	of	the	compact	radio	source	Sgr	A*	at	the	center	of	the	Milky Way	and	its	identification	as	the	likely	emission	of	gas	falling	onto	a	supermassive	black hole	(Balick	and	Brown	1974).	And	as	soon	as	it	was	realized	that	the	shadow	of	SgrA* could	really	be	photographed	in	the	forthcoming	years,	the	program	of	imaging	black holes	 with	 or	 without	 accretion	 disks	 and/or	 stellar	 background	 field	 developed	 at	 a much	 accelerated rate. Several dozens of papers with more	 or less elaborate visualizations	bloomed	out,	but	they	do	not	enter	into	the	purpose	of	the	present	review.

<!-- image -->

20

Figure	 22. Images	 of	 an	 optically	 thin	 emission	 region	 surrounding	 the	 galactic	 black	 hole SgrA*.	The	black	hole	is	maximally	rotating	(a	=	0.998)	in	the	top	row	and	non-rotating	in	the bottom	row.	The	emitting	gas	is	assumed	to	be	in	free	fall	(top)	or	on	Keplerian	shells	(bottom) with	 	 a	 viewing	 angle	 45°.	 The	 left	 column	 shows	 the	 ray-tracing	 calculations	 in	 general relativity,	the	other	columns	are	the	images	seen	by	an	idealized	VLBI	array	at	0.6	mm	and	1.3 mm	wavelengths,	taking	account	of	the	interstellar	scattering	(from	Falcke	et	al.	2000).

Figure	23. Polarization maps at three wavelengths (1.5 mm, 1 mm, 0.67 mm from top row to bottom row) calculated for the gala ctic	black	hole	candidate	SgrA*.	The	left	most	column shows	how	the	radio	maps	might	look	seen	from	a	close	observer,	the	other	columns	show how	the	map	might	look	from	Earth	with	our	vision	blurred	by	gas	in	interstellar	space	(from Bromley	et	al.	2001).

<!-- image -->

On	 the	 observational	 side,	 successive	 radio	 imaging	 observations	 progressively reduced	the	size	of	emission	region	if	SgrA*.	A	breakthrough	was	to	extend	VLBI	to	1mm wavelength,	where	the	scattering	effects	are	greatly	reduced	and	angular	resolution	is matched	to	the	shadow	of	the	galactic	black	hole.	Then	the	collective	effort	was	named the	 "Event	 Horizon	 Telescope"	 as	 the	 natural	 convergence	 of	 many	 historical	 and parallel	works	done	by	several	independent	teams	in	the	world	(Doeleman	et	al.	2009). The	later	measurement	of	the	size	of	the	6	billion	solar	mass	black	hole	in	M87	gave	a second	 source	 suitable	 for	 shadow	 imaging	 (Doeleman	 et	 al.	 2012).	 Now	 the	 Event Horizon Telescope Consortium involves 20 universities, observatories, research institutions,	 government	 agencies	 and	 more	 than	 a	 hundred	 scientists	 who	 hope	 to make	black	hole	imaging	a	reality	as	soon	as	2019.

To	 conclude	 this	 survey,	 the	 path	 from	 idea	 to	 reality	 can	 take	 very	 a	 long	 time. Imaging	black	holes,	first	with	computers,	now	with	telescopes,	is	a	fantastic	adventure. Forty	years	ago	I	couldn't	hope	that	a	real	image	would	be	reachable	in	my	lifetime	and that,	thanks	to	contributions	by	so	many	dedicated	colleagues,	my	dream	would	become true.

## References

Abramowicz,	M.,	Jaroszynski,	M.,	Sikora,	M.	: Relativistic	accreting	disks ,	Astron. Astrophys. 63 ,	221	(1978). Balick,	B., Brown,	R.L.	: Intense	sub-arcsecond	structure	in	the	galactic	center , Astrophys. J. 194 ,	265-270	(1974). Bardeen,	J.	M.	1973, Timelike	and	null	geodesics	in	the	Kerr	metric ,	in	Black	Holes	(Les Astres	Occlus),	ed.	C.	Dewitt	&amp;	B.	S.	Dewitt,	New	York:	Gordon	and	Breach,	pp.215-239. Bromley,	B.,	Chen,	K.,	Miller,W.	: Line	Emission	from	an	Accretion	Disk	around	a	Rotating Black	Hole:	Toward	a	Measurement	of	Frame	Dragging ,	Astrophys.J.	475,		57	(1997). Bromley,	B.,	Melia,	F.,	Liu,	S.	: Polarimetric	Imaging	of	the	Massive	Black	Hole	at	the Galactic	Center ,	Astrophys.J. 555 ,	L83-86	(2001). Carter	B.	: Axisymmetric	Black	Hole	Has	Only	Two	Degrees	of	Freedom ,	Physical	Review Letters 26 ,	331	(1971). Carter	B.	,	Luminet,	J.-P.	: Les	Trous	Noirs,	Maelströms	cosmiques, La	Recherche 94 ,	944 (1978). Carter	B.	,	Luminet,	J.-P.	: Pancake	Detonation	of	Stars	by	Black	Holes	in	Galactic	Nuclei, Nature 296 ,	211	(1982) . Chatzopoulos,	S.,	Fritz,	T.	K.,	Gerhard,	Gillessen,	O.,	S.	,	Wegg,	C.	,	Genzel,	R.	,	Pfuhl,	O.	: The old	nuclear	star	cluster	in	the	Milky	Way:	dynamics,	mass,	statistical	parallax,	and	black hole	mass ,	MNRAS, 447 ,	948	(2015) The	effects	of	redshifts	and	focusing	on	the	spectrum	of	an	accretion

Cunningham,	C.	T.	: disk	around	a	Kerr	black	hole ,	Astrophys.	J., 202 ,	788	(1975)

Cunningham,	C.T.,	Bardeen	J.M.	: The	optical	appearance	of	a	star	orbiting	an	extreme Kerr	black	hole ,	Astrophys.	J. 173 L137-142	(1972).

Cunningham,	C.T.,	Bardeen	J.M.	: The	optical	appearance	of	a	star	orbiting	an	extreme Kerr	black	hole ,	1973,	Astrophys.	J., 183 ,	237

Davelaar,	J.,	Bronzwaer,	T.,	Kok,	D.,	Younsi,	Z.,	Moscibrodzka,	M.,	Falcke,	H.: Observing supermassive	black	holes	in	virtual	reality ,	Computational	Astrophysics	and	Cosmology 5 ,1	(2018).	https://doi.org/10.1186/s40668-018-0023-7

Delesalle,	L.	,	Lachièze-Rey,	M.	,	Luminet,	J.-P.	: Infiniment	Courbe, TV	documentary,	52 mn,	France:	CNRS/Arte,	1994.

Doeleman,	S.S.,	et	al.	: Structure	of	Sagittarius	A*	at	86	GHz	using	VLBI	closure	quantities , Astron.	J., 121 ,	2610-2617	(2001).

Doeleman,	S.S.,	et	al.	: Event-horizon-scale	structure	in	the	supermassive	black	hole candidate	at	the	Galactic	Centre ,	Nature, 455 ,	78	(2008).

Doeleman,	S.S.,	et	al.	: Imaging	an	Event	Horizon	:	submm-VLBI	of		Super	massive	Black Hole, The	Astronomy	and	Astrophysics	Decadal	Survey,	Science	White	Papers,	no.	68 (2009).

Doeleman,	S.S.,	et	al.	: Jet-Launching	Structure	Resolved	Near	the	Supermassive	Black	Hole in	M87, Science 338 (6105),	355	(2012).

Doeleman,	S.S.	: Seeing	the	unseeable ,	Nature	Astronomy 1 ,	646	(2017)

Falcke,	H.	: Imaging	black	holes	:	past,	present	and	future ,	Journal	of	Physics	:	Conf.	Series 942 ,	012001	(2017)

Falcke,	H.,	Melia,	F.,	Agol,	E.	: Viewing	the	Shadow	of	the	Black	Hole	at	the	Galactic	Center , Astrophys.	J.	Lett. 528 ,	L13-L16	(2000).

Fanton	C.,	Calvani	M.,	de	Felice	F.,	Cadez	A.	: Detecting	Accretion	Disks	in	Active	Galactic Nuclei ,	Publ.	Astron.	Soc.	Japan 49 ,	159-169	(1997).

Fukue,	J.,	Yokoyama,	T.	: Color	Photographs	of	an	Accretion	Disk	around	a	Black	Hole , Publications	of	the	Astronomical	Society	of	Japan 40, 15-24	(1988).

Goddi,	C.,	Falcke,	H.,	et	al.: BlackHoleCam:	fundamental	physics	of	the	galactic	center .	Int. J.	Mod.	Phys.	D 26 ,	1730001-239	(2017).

Hamilton,	A.: Falling	into	a	black	hole .

http://jila.colorado.edu/~ajsh/insidebh/intro.html	(1998-2018).	Accessed	2019-02-26.

Hills,	J.G.	: Possible	power	source	of	Seyfert	galaxies	and	QSOs ,	Nature 254 ,		295	(1975).

James,	O.,	von	Tunzelmann,	E.,	Franklin,	P.,	Thorne,	K.S.: Gravitational	lensing	by	spinning black	holes	in	astrophysics,	and	in	the	movie	Interstellar .	Class.	Quantum	Gravity 32 (6), 065001	(2015).

Johnson,	M.	D.	,	Bouman,	K.	L.,	Blackburn,	L.	L.	,	Chael,	A.	A.,	Rosen,	J.	,	Shiokawa,	H.	, Roelofs,	F.	,	Akiyama,	K.	,	Fish,	V.	L.	,	Doeleman	S.	S.	: Dynamical	Imaging	with Interferometry ,	Astrophys.	J.,	850(2),	172	(2017).

Kerr,	R.P.	: Gravitational	Field	of	a	Spinning	Mass	as	an	Example	of	Algebraically	Special Metrics ,	Physical	Review	Letters 11 ,	237	(1963).

Kormendy,	J.,	Ho,	L.	: Supermassive	Black	Holes	in	Inactive	Galaxies ,	Encyclopedia	of Astronomy	and	Astrophysics,	ed.	P.Murdin,	article	id.	2635.	Bristol	:	Institute	of	Physics Publishing	(2001).

Luminet	J.-P.: Seeing	Black	Holes	:	from	the	Computer	to	the	Telescope, Universe 4 (8),	86 (2018)	[arXiv	:1804.03909].

Luminet,		J.-P.	: Black	Holes ,	Cambridge	University	Press,	1992.

Luminet,	J.-P.	: Interstellar	Science, International	Review	of	Science	vol.1	n°2	(march 2015)	[arXiv	:	1503.08305].

Luminet,	J.-P.: Image	of	a	Spherical	Black	Hole	with	Thin	Accretion	Disk, Astron.Astrophys. 75 ,	228	(1979).

Marck	J.-A.,	Luminet,	J.-P.	: Plongeon	dans	un	trou	noir ,	Pour	la	Science	Hors-Série Les trous	noirs (July	1997)	50-56.

Marck,	J.-A.	: Color	animation	of	a	black	hole	with	accretion	disk, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Oqop50ltrM	(1991)	(put	online	in	2011	by	J.-P. Luminet).

Marck,	J.-A.	: Colored	images	of	a	black	hole	accretion	disk	for	various	angles	of	view , unpublished	(1989).

Marck,	J.-A.	: Flight	into	a	Black	Hole, videocassette	11	mn,	Meudon	:	CNRS	Images (1994).

Marck,	J.-A.	: Short-Cut	Method	of	Solution	of	Geodesic	Equations	for	Schwarzschild	Black Hole ,	Classical	and	Quantum	Gravity 13 (3)	393-402	(1996).

Marrone,	D.	P.,	Moran,	J.	M.,	Zhao,	J.-H.,	Rao,	R.	: An	Unambiguous	Detection	of	Faraday Rotation	in	Sagittarius	A* ,	Astrophys.	J.	Lett.	654,	L57	(2007).

Nemiroff,	R.	: Visual	distortions	near	a	neutron	star	and	black	hole ,	Am.	J.	Phys. 61, 619 (1993)	[astro-ph/9312003].

Nemiroff,	R. Trip	to	a	Black	Hole https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ehoOkyHtBXw (2018)

Nerval,		G.	de	: Le	Christ	aux	Oliviers ,	in Les	Chimères ,	Paris,	1854.	Free	translation	by	J.-P. Luminet.

Ohanian,	H.	C.	: The	Black	Hole	as	a	Gravitational	'Lens' ,	Am.	J.	Phys. 55 ,	428-432	(1987).

Page,	D.N.,	Thorne,	K.S.	: Disk	Accretion	onto	a	Black	Hole.	I.	Time-Averaged	Structure	of Accretion	Disk ,	Astrophys.	J. 191 ,	499-506	(1974).

Palmer	L.,	Pryce	M.	&amp;	Unruh	W.	: Simulation	of	starlight	lensed	by	a	camera	orbiting	a Schwarzschild	black	hole ,	unpublished	(1978).

Pounds,	K.	A.	et	al.	: An	ultra-fast	inflow	in	the	luminous	Seyfert	PG1211+143 ,	Monthly Notices	of	the	Royal	Astronomical	Society 481 (2),	1832-1838	(2018).

Pringle,	J.	E.,	Rees,	M.	J.	: Accretion	Disc	Models	dor	Compact	X-ray	Sources ,	Astron. Astrophys. 21 ,	1	(1972).

Riazuelo,	A.	: Seeing	relativity	I.	Ray	tracing	in	a	Schwarzschild	metric	to	explore	the maximal	analytic	extension	of	the	metric	and	making	a	proper	rendering	of	the	stars , (2018)	[ArXiv	:1511.06025]

Rogers,	A.	: The	Warped	Astrophysics	of	Interstellar , https://www.wired.com/2014/10/astrophysics-interstellar-black-hole/.

Sargent,	W.	L.,	Young,	P.	J.,	Lynds,	C.	R.,	et	al.	: Dynamical	evidence	for	a	central	mass concentration	in	the	galaxy	M87 ,	Astrophys.	J. 221 ,	731-744	(1978).

Schastok,	J.	,	Soffel,	M.	,	Ruder,	H.,	Schneider,	M.	: Stellar	Sky	as	Seen	From	the	Vicinity	of	a Black	Hole ,	Am.	J.	Phys., 55 ,	336-341	(1987).

Shaikh,	R.	: Shadows	of	rotating	wormholes ,	Phys.	Rev.	D 98 ,	024044	(2018) [arXiv	:1803.11422]

Shakura,	N.I.,	Sunyaev,	R.	A.	: Black	holes	in	binary	systems.	Observational	appearance . Astro.	Astrophys. 24 ,	337-355	(1973)

Stuckey,	W.	M.	: The	Schwarzschild	Black	Hole	as	a	Gravitational	Mirror ,	Am.	J.	Phys. 61 (5),	448-456	(1993).

Thorne	K.: The Science of Interstellar ,	Norton	&amp;	Company	(november	2014).

Thorne,	K,	private	communication,	24/10/2014

Viergutz	S	U.	: Image	Generation	in	Kerr	Geometry.	I.	Analytical	Investigations	on	the Stationary	Emitter-Observer	Problem ,	Astron.	Astrophys. 272 ,	355-77	(1993)	;	Viergutz, S.U.	: Radiation	from	arbitrarily	shaped	objects	in	the	vicinity	of	Kerr	Black	Holes, Astrophys.	Space	Sci. 205 ,	155	(1993).